Do you believe in magic.
Well the logarithm allows you to do something in mathematics that seems like magic.
In particular the logarithm allows you to convert multiplication into addition and division into subtraction.
That is pretty magical.
So that's going to be the main math topic of this video.
And along the way in python you are also going to learn more about late tech formatting in particular
making parentheses look really nice.
So let's begin.
This is called the multiplication property of the logarithm.
And essentially what it means is that if you have a multiplication embedded inside the logarithm.
So here this is the logarithm of the quantity A times B that can be expanded to or maybe simplified
as the log of a plus the log of B.
So that is pretty remarkable because we have converted from a multiplication into addition.
This property becomes really useful really powerful in calculus and in particular in differential equations
because you will often find in differential equations that solving an equation with multiplication is
really difficult maybe even impossible or at least really time consuming.
But if you can take the log of the equation you can break up the multiplication into addition and very
often in differential equations and solving differential equations working with separate in terms that
are added together is much easier than in terms that are multiplying.
So this is for multiplication and addition and the flip side of multiplication is division.
So let's see what that looks like.
So here we see that the log of a divided by B is the same thing as the logarithm of a minus the logarithm
of B.
So that's also pretty cool.
You can also by the way see a failure scenario if B is equal to zero then this term doesn't exist but
you know the logarithm of zero is also not defined the logarithm of zero is minus infinity.
So that condition is kind of built into the log anyway so that's about the math and I'm gonna highlight
this to you in a moment in Python but I also want to illustrate the formatting so here you see these
parentheses are kind of like smaller and thinner and these parentheses are much taller and media and
in particular what happened here is when I wrote the latex code to write out this formula here then
I made I use a special latex code to automatically stretch these parentheses to be however tall they
need to be in order to capture the entirety of what's inside the parent medical statement and here so
that's this vertically aligned fraction a.
OVERBY So latex automatically expanded or correctly sized these parentheses so I'm going to show you
in a few moments how to do this in latex.
So I'm going to be using num pi and the display and math functions.
So let's see.
I'm gonna get started by specifying two variables.
Let's say a equals three B equals four.
And now I'm going to compute a couple of different results so result one is going to be num piled out
log a times b result two is going to be num Pi of a Times num Pi the log of B.
So here I'm actually multiplying the two terms I'm taking the logarithm of each term separately and
multiplying them together.
Now if you hadn't seen the previous few minutes of the video then you probably would think that this
term and this term are equal that to me that seems intuitive that these two expressions should be equal
to each other.
However we are going to see that it's actually that result one is actually equal to num paid out log
of a plus the log of B.
So to highlight these to illustrate that the the first term in the third term are equal to each other.
I'm going to use latex coatings.
That's right.
Display math.
And then I'm just kind of write this all out.
So this is going to be log of percent G times.
Percent G and of course I'm gonna replace these with a and b equals and then whatever this happens to
equal.
So let's see.
We need three substitutions here.
So a and b and result 1 Let's already see what this looks like.
Okay.
So this tells us that the log of three times four which is just a log of twelve happens to be a little
under two and a half.
Okay.
And so what I'm gonna do now is copy and paste this code and essentially I want this to be rewritten
for result too.
So what do I have to change for result to.
So this has to be just the log of a Times the log of B.
I think that's correct.
Let's see.
Yeah.
Log of three times the log of 4 equals one point five.
Which is definitely not the same thing as two point forty eight.
Okay.
And then copy and paste this.
This is going to be adapted to be result 3.
And now here instead of saying times we are going to say plus.
All right.
Pretty neat.
So here we see this is confirmation.
This is an example that illustrates the concept that I showed you in the slides that the logarithm of
three times four equals the log of three plus the log of four.
All right.
And what I'd like to do now is just write that out a little bit more clearly.
So I want to say this expression equals this expression.
So let's do that.
So copy and paste announce what I want to do is say the log of three times four equals and then essentially
what I have done here the log of three plus the log of four so there is all that code and then we need
to replace this is a b and this is gonna be again a and then B.
So that has to replace here.
So a comma B run that make sure that that looks good which it does.
And then I want to write explicitly that this does not equal the log of three times the log of four.
So now there's this equals sign here.
How can we say not equals.
Well in code in many languages that not equals sign looks something like this.
You would write.
Exclamation point equals or sometimes in some languages it's Tilde equals.
But actually what I want is a full on not equals sign which has like that kind of almost vertical slanted
line going through the equals sign.
So to do that in latex it is slash slash n e q for not equal.
I don't remember if I've already introduced this code to you but here you see log of three times four
is not equal to the log of three times the log of four.
Now what I want to do is essentially repeat all of this but for division and subtraction.
So let's see.
I'm going to copy all of this code insert a new cell below paste everything in and then let's see what
we need to change.
So this has to be a divided by B.
This has to be longer a divided by log of B and this has to be log of a minus the log of B.
And now we get into some of this fraction business.
So let's see.
Let's start with frac.
And this has to be the fraction here.
And okay so I'm just gonna run this code to make sure I haven't made any mistakes yet.
So now you see that this parenthesis is small these parentheses are a little bit small.
It looks kind of awkward right because the three divided by four is much larger it's much taller than
the parentheses.
So I'm going to leave this here.
I'm going to fix it later on.
Just so you have this printed here for comparison.
Let's see.
And so the next one is going to be I think I'm actually just going to leave this as a slash instead
of as a vertical line.
So it looks a little funny here with all these slashes going in different directions but essentially
this is like the division with our indicating a fraction or division without explicitly putting the
numerator on top and the denominator directly underneath.
Okay.
And then here this changes to a minus sign.
All right.
So so far these top three lines look good.
And then you can also see that the log of three divided by four is not the same thing as log of three
divided by the log of four.
Instead this term is the same thing as the log of the numerator minus the log of the denominator.
Okay.
And now I need to fix this code down here.
So let's see so I want this to say the log of three divided by four.
So this partly looks the same.
We still have the fractions so it's still going to be Frac of the numerator and then in another set
of curly brackets the denominator.
And then this would be minus.
However of course that doesn't look right.
So what we need to do is replace this parentheses with Slash slash left and then a parentheses.
So here's what that code looks like on its own.
So slash slash left and then parentheses and then the corresponding term on the right is you guessed
it slash slash right.
And then a parenthesis here.
So let's see what happens when I run this all right.
So you can see that this looks really nice.
I think this looks much nicer.
This formatting is much prettier than this formatting here.
These parentheses are kind of awkwardly small.
All right.
And then one more thing I want to point out is that sometimes if you are doing this making these adaptable
sized parentheses or brackets or whatever you're using embedded in another function that already needs
the parentheses then you can use another set of curly brackets here.
So now this outermost set of curly brackets is indicating to Python that we want all of this everything
inside here to be associated with the log term.
Now in this particular case that didn't actually matter we still get a nice result.
All right.
And now let's see.
So I just need to complete this line of code so it matches to the last line needs to say that this is
so the log of three divided by four is not equal to the logarithm of three divided by the logarithm
of four.
And I think actually just for fun I will put this part in a actual fraction of vertically oriented fraction.
Let's see how this looks now.
All right.
Very nice.
So here you see the division property of logarithm.
And here you see the multiplication property of the logarithm and now it turns out that there is also
an exponential property of the logarithm and that is the goal of this exercise.
So the goal here is to take a few examples and illustrate this concept as property of the log that a
2 or I should say logarithm of a to the power of B equals B times the logarithm of A.
So this is also really useful property because you know sometimes you're trying to integrate a expression
or compute the derivative of an expression and the term in the explanation can be really hairy or really
weird.
So if you take the log of everything then this exponent just turns into a multiplication.
So whatever is in the exponent when you take the log of that whole term the base term stays inside the
logarithm and the exponent term comes outside and it just multiplies the result of the log.
So positive videos switched to Python and essentially do some coding to show using a few different numerical
examples that the left hand side really is equal to this right hand side.
All right let's start here with a new cell.
So insert cell below so I'm gonna stick with the terms a and b.
Just because I already have them there and let's see.
So I'm going to write expression 1 equals num Pi of log.
And now I want a not a times b but a to the power of B and then expression two is going to be b times
num pi log of a.
So you can see I left the base term inside the logarithm and I took the exponent and brought it out
to be multiplicative in front of the logarithm.
Okay.
And now I'm just going to write.
Print expression 1 minus.
Expression 2.
And this is equal to zero which is expected result because this term is the same thing as this term.
All right.
And then I want to do one more thing and that is maybe I'll do it up here.
I'm gonna add another expression so I'm gonna say expression 3 and what I'm going to do here is multiply
the logarithm or add the logarithm b times so let's see what was B again B was 4.
Okay.
So if four times the log of three is really equal to a to the power of B where B is four then that means
that I should also be able to say num pi log a plus log a plus log a plus log.
So that's really all this is doing.
Main difference is here I'm adding them here are multiplying them and here this is hardcoded to before
so obviously if you would go back earlier and change the value of be to be you know five or seven point
three then this is no longer valid.
So this expression written out like this is valid as long as B is equal to 4.
So let's see.
Now I'm gonna print out these three expressions expert 3 and you can see that they are all identical
to each other certainly up to 15 degrees of precision or however many nos.
This is so this was yet another productive and fun video.
I hope you agree.
You learned about some really special properties of logarithm in particular that the logarithm can magically
transform multiplication into addition division into subtraction and exponents into multiplication.
As I mentioned in the middle of the video that actually becomes pretty relevant for advanced calculus
topics and differential equations.
And on top of the math you also learned a little bit more about latex formatting in particular with
regard to parentheses in the next video.
You're going to learn about scientific notation and you're actually gonna get to see an example application
of using the logarithm for computing the order of magnitude of a number.
So stay tuned.